---
layout: page
title: Developing a Theory of Change
subtitle: Session 3.1
---

### About this Session

In this session you will learn about the importance of a good conceptual model. Specifically, you will learn how to create a theory of change and a logic model.

### Preparing for Class

* GHR Chapter 6
* Patil, S. R., Arnold, B. F., Salvatore, A. L., Briceno, B., Ganguly, S., Colford Jr, J. M., & Gertler, P. J. (2014). The effect of India's total sanitation campaign on defecation behaviors and child health in rural Madhya Pradesh: a cluster randomized controlled trial. *PLoS Med, 11(8)*, e1001709.
* Pre-class readiness assessment (371/[702](https://sakai.duke.edu/samigo-app/servlet/Login?id=6c32d459-89fb-4545-b333-cd786e86aca11505834326468))

### Slides/Materials

Posted [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0Bxn_jkXZ1lxuVklQakF4MjZGSDQ?usp=sharing) after class

### In-Class Activity

As you know from your reading, Patil et al. (2014) set out to study the effects of India's Total Sanitation Campaign on the practice of open defecation. From the abstract:

> Poor sanitation is thought to be a major cause of enteric infections among young children. However, there are no previously published randomized trials to measure the health impacts of large-scale sanitation programs. India's Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) is one such program that seeks to end the practice of open defecation by changing social norms and behaviors, and providing technical support and financial subsidies. The objective of this study was to measure the effect of the TSC implemented with capacity building support from the World Bank's Water and Sanitation Program in Madhya Pradesh on availability of individual household latrines (IHLs), defecation behaviors, and child health (diarrhea, highly credible gastrointestinal illness [HCGI], parasitic infections, anemia, growth).

Start by creating a theory of change for TSC. We'll review diagrams as a class and then ask you to transform your theory of change into a logic model. As you create these models, think about what the authors are setting out to measure in this study. As we'll discuss in class, I want you to view these conceptual models as a bridge between research questions and study measurement, the topic of this module. 

* * *

[Back to schedule]({{ site.baseurl }}/schedule/)