---
layout: page
title: Global Health Indicators
subtitle: Session 3.2
---

### About this Session

In this session you will learn how to operationalize constructs in a conceptual model by specifying outcomes and indicators. You will learn what makes an indicator DREAMY and explore commonly reported indicators in global health. 

### Preparing for Class

* GHR Chapter 7.1-7.3
* Patil, S. R., Arnold, B. F., Salvatore, A. L., Briceno, B., Ganguly, S., Colford Jr, J. M., & Gertler, P. J. (2014). The effect of India's total sanitation campaign on defecation behaviors and child health in rural Madhya Pradesh: a cluster randomized controlled trial. *PLoS Med, 11(8)*, e1001709.
* Patel, V., Weobong, B., Weiss, H. A., Anand, A., Bhat, B., Katti, B., ... & Vijayakumar, L. (2017). The Healthy Activity Program (HAP), a lay counsellor-delivered brief psychological treatment for severe depression, in primary care in India: a randomised controlled trial. *The Lancet, 389(10065)*, 176-185.
* Lim, S. S., Allen, K., Bhutta, Z. A., Dandona, L., Forouzanfar, M. H., Fullman, N., ... & Kinfu, Y. (2016). Measuring the health-related Sustainable Development Goals in 188 countries: a baseline analysis from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. *The Lancet, 388(10053)*, 1813-1850.
* Pre-class readiness assessment (371/[702](https://sakai.duke.edu/samigo-app/servlet/Login?id=6c32d459-89fb-4545-b333-cd786e86aca11506093394705))

### Slides/Materials

Posted [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0Bxn_jkXZ1lxuVklQakF4MjZGSDQ?usp=sharing) after class

### In-Class Activities

We'll begin with practice creating a logic model for the Healthy Activity Program (HAP), a lay counsellor-delivered brief psychological treatment for severe depression in India. Once you specify the model, you will identify indicators that Patel et al. (2017) measured for each component.

Then we'll return to Patil et al. and the evaluation of the total sanitation campaign in India. You already developed a logic model for this intervention, so the next step is to drill down to outcome definitions. What outcomes did the authors measure, and how did they define each outcome?

These two activities are designed to help you (a) learn how to quickly assess key measurement issues in published work and (b) get a sense of how to be thorough as you prepare a measurement plan for your own studies.

The third activity will give us an opportunity to pull back the lens and look at global health indicators more broadly. Every student of global health should know the key indicators we track at a population level. The WHO Global Reference List and the Sustainable Development Goals website are two excellent resources. In this activity you will pick two indicators and drill down to understand how each indicator is defined and measured.

* * *

[Back to schedule]({{ site.baseurl }}/schedule/)