---
layout: page
title: Measurement
subtitle: Session 3.3
---

### About this Session

In this session you will learn about how instruments are constructed and evaluated for reliability and validity. 

### Preparing for Class

* GHR Chapter 7.4 and 7.5
* Kohrt, B. A., Jordans, M. J., Tol, W. A., Luitel, N. P., Maharjan, S. M., & Upadhaya, N. (2011). Validation of cross-cultural child mental health and psychosocial research instruments: adapting the Depression Self-Rating Scale and Child PTSD Symptom Scale in Nepal. *BMC Psychiatry, 11(1)*, 127.
* Green et al. Perinatal depression manuscript under review. See Piazza.
* [Pre-class readiness assessment](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1FkE2xrVPej8o07Kgd9mNEK0vovv8EzJfVoAjUOO_gy0/edit?usp=sharing)

### Slides/Materials

Posted [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0Bxn_jkXZ1lxuVklQakF4MjZGSDQ?usp=sharing) after class

### In-Class Activities

We'll review Kohrt et al. (2011) with the goal of understanding why instrument validation is important and how careful work prior to validation can make an instrument culturally- and contextually-relevant.

Then we'll turn to an example from my work in Kenya on perinatal depression. I'll describe the formative study that we completed to come up with a set of 60 items that we used to assess perinatal depression among a sample of pregnant women and new mothers. You'll use the results of this study to calculate the metrics we use to evaluate criterion validity—does the new scale we developed accurately measure this thing called depression?

* * *

[Back to schedule]({{ site.baseurl }}/schedule/)