---
layout: page
title: Quantitative Methods of Data Collection
subtitle: Session 3.4
---

### About this Session

In this session you will learn survey and non-survey instruments that can be used to collect quantitative data. 

### Preparing for Class

* GHR Chapter 8.1
* [DHS Model Questionnaire](https://dhsprogram.com/What-We-Do/Survey-Types/DHS-Questionnaires.cfm)
* Patil, S. R., Arnold, B. F., Salvatore, A. L., Briceno, B., Ganguly, S., Colford Jr, J. M., & Gertler, P. J. (2014). The effect of India's total sanitation campaign on defecation behaviors and child health in rural Madhya Pradesh: a cluster randomized controlled trial. *PLoS Med, 11(8)*, e1001709.
* Browse [microdata repository](http://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/2033/study-description) for the Patil et al. evaluation; focus on data collection tools under "related materials"
* Pre-class readiness assessment (371/[702](https://sakai.duke.edu/samigo-app/servlet/Login?id=6c32d459-89fb-4545-b333-cd786e86aca11506800016595))

### Slides/Materials

Posted [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0Bxn_jkXZ1lxuVklQakF4MjZGSDQ?usp=sharing) after class

### In-Class Activities

In the first activity you will string together a few skills you've learned so far this semester to create a survey instrument to assess a parent's or guardian's readiness to tell a child that the child is HIV positive. Start by conducting a quick literature search to generate a list of topics that seem relevant to pediatric HIV disclosure. Hint: look for a resource that will quickly get you up to speed on what we know about pediatric HIV disclosure. Then create roughly 10 survey items to assess these constructs. Imagine that we want to use your assessment in HIV care clinics located in low-income countries with a generalized HIV epidemic. Program your short survey in Qualtrics and share your survey with a nearby team. Teams will critique each other's work.

In the next activity you will return to Patil et al. (2014) and build off of your work identifying the definitions of key study outcomes. Your objective today is to determine how each outcome was measured. What was the method of data collection?

* * *

[Back to schedule]({{ site.baseurl }}/schedule/)