---
layout: page
title: Power
subtitle: Session 5.3
---

### About this Session

In this session you will learn how to determine the optimal sample size given different study objectives and constraints.

### Session Learning Objectives
<iframe width="100%" height="200" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1TMvMv0gxncPxF8Tf2HSfp2GUoMxcNK_SD8gM9vfApBU/pubhtml?gid=101408961&amp;single=true&amp;widget=true&amp;headers=false"></iframe>
[Download as PDF](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1TMvMv0gxncPxF8Tf2HSfp2GUoMxcNK_SD8gM9vfApBU/pub?gid=101408961&single=true&output=pdf)

*Get together with two other members of your team. One person should make a copy of the response template and share it with the others and with the teaching team. Follow the instructions in the template and on this page.*

### In-Class Activities

| **Pre-class prep** | None |
| **Materials**       | [Response template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12f1HtGw-qrdN67O5s4fa_SA4kMhhcWKlQY0vWV6YPe8/edit?usp=sharing) |
| **Submission**     | Share with `designsandmethods@` |

<p></p>

You and your partners have been asked to conduct a randomized controlled trial of a new [behavior change communication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behavior_change_communication) (BCC) program designed to increase the use of insecticide treated nets (ITN) for children under 5 years of age living on the shores of Lake Victoria, a malaria endemic region in Kenya. The NGO's new BCC program involves having a drama troupe visit villages on multiple occasions and perform a series of outdoor plays about the importance of ITN use and malaria prevention.

The donor funding the BCC program set aside $85,000 for a rigorous evaluation, and the program officer wants to know the smallest effect that you could detect in the trial. To answer this question, you need to know the starting point—the prevalence of bed net use without the new BCC program. Then you can use [this power calculator](https://egap.shinyapps.io/Power_Calculator/) and this [budget template](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1RVraM9w47fyzAQ3CaXGQokTUye8ueYuxnaOleU7W8tI/edit?usp=sharing) to determine the smallest effect (binary, difference of proportions) you can detect with 80% power. [note: only type in the yellow cells for the budget]

The non-governmental organization (NGO) that will implement the BCC program operates in Kisumu County. They've contracted your team to complete a baseline survey in no more than 20 days. Your first deliverable is a brief implementation plan that addresses issues related to power and sample size.


* * *

[Back to schedule]({{ site.baseurl }}/schedule/)