---
layout: page
title: Research 101 
subtitle: Session 1.2
---

### About this Session

In this session we'll review the fundamentals of scientific research from a global health perspective. You'll also begin to identify your particular research interests and discover where these interests fit in the larger landscape of global health.

### Session Learning Objectives
<iframe width="100%" height="200" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1saUbLsjOw9P2LbcZ1MGCaP8PQg9nA48H9Of57S1pQgg/pubhtml?gid=1663292391&amp;single=true&amp;widget=true&amp;headers=false"></iframe>
[Download as PDF](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1saUbLsjOw9P2LbcZ1MGCaP8PQg9nA48H9Of57S1pQgg/pub?gid=1663292391&single=true&output=pdf)

### In-Class Activities

*Get together with a partner on your team. One person should make a copy of the response template and share it with the other and with the teaching team. Follow the instructions in the template and on this page.*

| **Pre-class prep** | Read the abstract and introductions of the following papers. Take note of research questions, hypotheses, and theories. <br><br> Tsai, A. C., & Venkataramani, A. S. (2015). The causal effect of education on HIV stigma in Uganda: evidence from a natural experiment. *Social Science & Medicine, 142*, 37-46. <br><br> Betancourt, T. S., Agnew-Blais, J., Gilman, S. E., Williams, D. R., & Ellis, B. H. (2010). Past horrors, present struggles: The role of stigma in the association between war experiences and psychosocial adjustment among former child soldiers in Sierra Leone. *Social Science & Medicine, 70(1)*, 17-26. |
| **Materials**       | [Response Template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1DE4UUd-qBk3Fr6aUL26XMUzeXdRs0IwAxofjVg3XJGE/edit?usp=sharing) |
| **Submission**     | Share with `designsandmethods@` |

<br>

#### Understanding the Research Landscape

This course will give you broad exposure to research in global health, while at the same time encouraging you to explore a more narrow area of interest. Some students begin the course with a clear sense of their interests. Others are new to global health and are interested in everything from acute care to zoonoses. If you are the second type of student, don't panic. Tell your partner about your general interests and see if you can identify one area to explore today. 

In this activity you'll work alongside your partner to explore where scholars in your respective fields publish their work. Start by navigating to the *Web of Science* database. Go to the Duke Library website and click on "Research Databases", or just click [here](http://guides.library.duke.edu/az.php). Then select *Journal Citation Reports*.

1. You'll see that journals are ranked by Impact Factor. What are Impact Factors?

2. Find your specialty(ies) under "Select Categories" and view the results. What is the top journal in your field? If you're struggling to find the right category, work backwards: go to [*Google Scholar*](https://scholar.google.com/) and find an article that fits your general interests. Note where that article is published and search for this journal in *Journal Citation Reports*. This will give you the category and identify related journals.

3. Next, select a journal that has a more narrow focus on one of your interests. For example, if you are interested in studies about health psychology, you're in luck: *Health Psychology* is the journal that all of your colleagues are reading. The target journal you select does not need to be the top ranked in your broader discipline (e.g., psychology). Once you find a potential target journal, visit its website to find details like open access fees and acceptance rates. Most journal websites have a section called "Information for Authors". Start there. Don't pick *Nature*, *JAMA*, *Science*, or *NEJM* as target journals since they have broad readership and tend to focus on breakthroughs. **Sign up for email alerts about new issues.**

4. Twitter is a good source of information about current debates in your field, new findings, funding, and advocacy. You don't have to tweet to find benefits in the platform, but [many do](http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2014/09/top-50-science-stars-twitter). Not sure where to start? Open an account, do a quick search, and follow names and organizations you know. They will lead you to the people you don't know but should. For this activity you can search without signing up for an account.

5. Search for professional associations or societies that you might consider joining or following. For instance, students interested in psychology might look at the American Psychological Association and one or more of the [APA's 50+ divisions](http://www.apa.org/about/division/). Interested in governance and politics? Check out [EGAP](http://egap.org/). In addition to looking for relevant organizations to follow and join, you should start identifying where scholars in your field go to present their work and network. BEWARE: there are tons of bogus conferences and journals that masquerade as legitimate entities.

* * *

[Back to schedule]({{ site.baseurl }}/schedule/)