---
layout: page
title: Tools of the Trade
subtitle: Session 1.3
---

### About this Session

In this session we will introduce you to two data management and analysis tools that you will use extensively in global health research. The goal is to make you ready to use these tools in course tutorials this semester and to spark an interest so that you return later to learn more.

R is a powerful statistical programming language that is free and open source. This means that you and your colleagues—wherever they are in the world—will always be able to use the latest version of R and customize it to fit your needs. If you see a future for yourself in data science more generally, [you need to know R](http://www.kdnuggets.com/2015/05/r-vs-python-data-science.html). There is a [large community of R users](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/r) with a lot of wisdom to share.

Excel is a fantastic tool for project management. Some people get a long way in Excel for data analysis, but [I don't recommend it](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2013/04/16/is-the-best-evidence-for-austerity-based-on-an-excel-spreadsheet-error/?utm_term=.71ce013f966a). Programs like R, Stata, Python, and SAS are much better options for analysis because they enable you to create [reproducible analyses](https://www.coursera.org/learn/reproducible-research). Still, I can say with 100% certainty that you will use Excel for some task in your first global health job. My experience is that students come to these entry level jobs not knowing enough about Excel. I want to change this. Excel is closed, proprietary software from Microsoft, but it is ubiquitous. There is [a free, open source alternative](https://www.openoffice.org/), but most offices rely on Excel, so this is what I'll have you demo in class.

**Q**: I already know how to use R and Excel.

**A**: Great! Please help the person next to you.

* * *

### Preparing for Class

* Watch [this video](https://www.rstudio.com/resources/webinars/rstudio-essentials-webinar-series-part-1/) from RStudio about programming essentials
* Watch these videos on Excel from Daniel Egger (Duke NetID required to view via these links, but Prof Egger's full "Mastering Data Analysis in Excel" course is available to anyone through [Coursera](https://www.coursera.org/learn/analytics-excel))
	* [Intro to charting](https://warpwire.duke.edu/w/4ngBAA/) ([download workbook](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0Bxn_jkXZ1lxubldIR1FrUU5FbDg))
	* [Arithmetic in Excel](https://warpwire.duke.edu/w/4XgBAA/) ([download workbook](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0Bxn_jkXZ1lxuNTVxREtKTzhqalk))
* Make sure you've successfully logged into RStudio on the Duke virtual machine and that you've installed MS Excel [per these instructions](http://www.globalhealthresearch.co/modules/mod1/s1-1/).
* Pre-class readiness assessment (371/[702](https://sakai.duke.edu/samigo-app/servlet/Login?id=5d8e4198-261f-466b-bbd1-10314d1959aa1504452958914))

### Slides/Materials

Posted [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0Bxn_jkXZ1lxuVklQakF4MjZGSDQ?usp=sharing) after class

### In-Class Activities

<p></p>

#### R

We're going to use an R package called [swirl](http://swirlstats.com/) to teach you a little about R. 

> swirl teaches you R programming and data science interactively, at your own pace, and right in the R console! Users receive immediate feedback as they are guided through self-paced lessons in data science and R programming.

1. Go to [Duke's Virtual Machine management website](https://vm-manage.oit.duke.edu/containers), enter your Duke credentials, and login to your RStudio environment.

2. Start swirl.

	<script src="https://gist.github.com/ericpgreen/8180fd370e1bdb22a6f7dc95b6355713.js"></script>
    
3. Step through the instructions and select "R Programming" and the "Basic Building Blocks" lesson.

<p></p>

#### Excel

*NOTE: All instructions and screenshots are from Excel for Mac 2016, but it should be easy to adapt for other versions.*

In 2009, several colleagues and I began working with AVSI Uganda on a 3-year impact evaluation of a cash and skills transfer program called WINGS. We're going to use Excel to explore some of the program monitoring and baseline data. All of the data and replication materials for Stata are posted on the Harvard Dataverse. 

> Annan, Jeannie; Blattman, Christopher; Green, Eric; Jamison, Julian, 2015, "Enterprises for Ultra Poor Women After War: The WINGS Program in Northern Uganda", [doi:10.7910/DVN/QA0R1O, Harvard Dataverse, V2](https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/QA0R1O).

1. Start by downloading the [final dataset](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0Bxn_jkXZ1lxuRF95SG02Y2xGTFU) that I modified for teaching purposes.

2. There are four worksheets in this file: `tutorial results`, `baseline`, `cash disbursement`, and `attendance`. Go into worksheets 2-4 and **freeze** `Row 1` and `Column A` so that you can always see the participant IDs and the variable names when you scroll. You can do this by clicking on "View" in the Ribbon and then "Freeze Top Row" and "Freeze First Column". Alternatively, you can click in cell `B2` and then click "Freeze Panes" in the View Ribbon.

3. Each row represents data from one person (aka, wide format). Some people in the `baseline` worksheet were replacements who were recruited after the baseline. Let's **count** how many people were originals (`sample_p1=="yes"`).
	
	a. One method is to create a column that **recodes** the string value `yes` to `1`, and then use a formula to add the `1's`. 
	
	* Go to the first blank column, P, and create a new variable called `sample_p1_yes`. 
	* In cell P2, type `=IF(E2="yes",1,0)`. This should return a value of `1` in `P2` since the value in `E2` is `yes`.
		* This is an example of an `IF` statement. You read it like this: **IF** the condition is `TRUE`, **then** return some value, **otherwise** return a different value. 
		* If the value in cell `E2` is equal to `yes` (e.g., `E2="yes"` is true), then return `1`, otherwise (aka, if the value is something other than `yes`) return `0`.
	* Fill this formula to the other cells in this column by moving your cursor to the bottom right corner of cell `P2`. The cursor will turn from an arrowhead to a bold cross. When it does this, click and drag all the way down to the last row of data, Row 1870. Then release your cursor and watch the rest of the values appear.
	* Next, go to the `tutorial results` worksheet and click on the answer cell for `Step 3a`. 
		* Type `=sum(` and then click on the `baseline` worksheet. 
		* Click on the column heading for your new variable in `Column P` to select the entire column. 
		* Hit return. 
		* You should get a value of `1800` for `Step 3a`.
		* Alternatively, you could enter the formula directly as `=SUM(baseline!P:P)`.

	b. These steps come in handy for other problems, but there is an easier approach to solving this particular problem: `COUNTIF`. This **formula** will count the number of cells matching a specific condition; in this case, we'll count cells in `Column E` that have a value of `"yes"`.
	
	* Click on the answer cell for `Step 3b`. 
	* Type `=countif(` and then click on the `baseline` worksheet. 
	* You'll notice that Excel wants you to enter the `range` and `criteria` for the `COUNTIF` formula.
		* `range`: Click on the column heading for the original variable in `Column E` to select the entire column.
		* `criteria`: Enter `"yes"`.
	* You should get a value of `1800` for `Step 3b`.
	* Alternatively, you could enter the formula directly as `=COUNTIF(baseline!E:E,"yes")`. 
	
4. Now let's hide the replacements in `baseline` with a **filter**. `Column E` (`sample_p1`) is an indicator for whether the person is an original participant, so we want to see only values of `yes`.

	* Click on cell `E1` (`sample_p1`), and then click "Filter" in the Data Ribbon. You should see dropdown icons appear on each variable name. 
	* Click on the filter for Column E (`sample_p1`). Checkboxes will appear, one for each value present in the column. Uncheck every box *except* `yes`. 

5. We're going to create a **PivotTable** to quickly summarize some of the baseline data. But first, let's find and replace some values to make the table easier to interpret.

	* Highlight `Columns L-O`
	* Replace `1` with `yes`
		* Go the `Edit-> Find-> Replace` menu.
		* Set `Find what:` to `1`
		* Set `Replace with:` to `yes`
		* `Replace All`
	* Now replace `0` with `no`

6. With `Columns L-O` highlighted, go to the `Data-> Summarize with PivotTable` menu. Keep the default settings and click `OK`. Let's do a simple count of abduction history (`recruited_bas`). 

	* Drag `recruited_bas` to the "Columns" box and then drag it again to the "Values" box. 
	* You'll see that there there are 44 people with a value of 0 and 15 with a value of 1. We did a Find/Replace, but we did so with a filter on; some values were missed. 
	* Let's add a filter to our PivotTable. Click on "Change Data Source" in the PivotTable Ribbon and change `baseline!$L:$O` to `baseline!$A:$O` so we get all of the columns.
	* Drag `sample_p1` to the "Filter" box. Use the dropdown menu to uncheck every box *except* yes.
	* This should now show you that `405` of the `1,800` original participants reported that they had been abducted by the rebel group (Lord's Resistance Army) at some point in the past.

7. Drag `age_bas` to the "Values" box and click the "i" icon to change the value type from `Count` to `Average`. This will give us:
	* the average age among those never abducted recruited_bas="no"
	* the average age among those who were abducted recruited_bas="yes"
	* the overall (total) average age for all `1800` original participants.

8. This will start to get a bit messy, but we can also run a **cross-tabluation** of abduction status by literacy status.
	* Drag `illiterate_bas` to the "Rows" box.
	* You should see that among the `405` people who had been abducted (`Column D` for "yes"), `304` are illiterate (`Row 8` for "yes").

9. Return to the `baseline` worksheet. Let's use **conditional formatting** to get a quick sense of who is illiterate and has a history of abduction. 
	* Simple
		* Highlight `Columns L-M`
		* Go to the `Formatting-> Conditional Formatting` menu.
		* Click the "plus" sign.
		* Select the "Classic style"
		* Select "Format only cells that contain" and "Specific text" "containing" and enter `yes`.
		* Click OK twice. All `yes` values in `Columns L-M` should be red.
	* Formula-based
		* Now highlight `Column A`, go back to the Conditional Formatting menu, click the "plus" button again, and select the "Classic" style.
		* Select "Use a formula..."
		* Enter `=AND(L1="yes",M1="yes")` and set "Format with:" to "yellow"
		* Enter `baseline!$A:$A` for "Applies to".
		* Click OK. Every participant who is both illiterate and with a history of abduction should have a yellow `partid` value.

10. Now we will use the **`VLOOKUP`** function to copy the  `dis1amount` variable from the `cash disbursement` worksheet into the `baseline` worksheet.

	* If you check, you will see only `896` participants are represented in the `cash disbursement` worksheet. This is how many of the original `1800` participants were randomly assigned to get the program in Phase 1 (`assigned_p1=1`).
	* Make a new variable in `baseline` `Column Q` called `dis1amount`. 
	* In Q2, type `=VLOOKUP(`
	* This function wants several inputs:
		* `lookup_value`: a value in `baseline` that we can look for in `cash disbursement`
		* `table_array`: some columns in `cash disbursement` to search
		* `col_index_num`: a column in `cash disbursement` that contains the value we want to copy over to `baseline`
	* Complete the formula by typing `=VLOOKUP(A2,'cash disbursement'!A:S,19,FALSE)`. This says:
		* Look for the specific participant ID in `A2` (i.e., `3000`) of the `baseline` worksheet in `Column A` of the `cash disbursement` worksheet
		* When you find value `3000`, look across `Columns A-S` and return the value for the `19th` column (which is `Column S`, `dis1amount`)
	* Fill this formula down to all rows with data in the `baseline` worksheet. Anyone not assigned to the program (`assigned_p1=0`)—thus not represented in the `cash disbursement` worksheet—should have a value of `#N/A`. Everyone else's value should have copied over.

11. Let's make one more PivotTable and **plot** the results. 

	* Select all columns the `cash disbursement` worksheet.
	* Go to the `Data-> Summarize with PivotTable` menu and accept the defaults.
	* Drag `biztype1` to the "Rows" and "Values" boxes. This should give you a count of each business type.
	* Click on the dropdown menu on "Row Labels" (`Row 3`) in the PivotTable and choose to "Sort by" `Count of biztype1`. Sort descending.
	* To plot the results, select cells `A4:B14` and go to the Insert Ribbon. Try a clustered column chart.

* * *

[Back to schedule]({{ site.baseurl }}/schedule/)