---
layout: page
title: Observational Designs in the Early Days of HIV and AIDS
subtitle: Session 6.1
---

### About this Session

In this session you will learn about the following observational research designs in the context of early work to understand the emergence of AIDS:

* case report/series
* case-control
* cross-sectional
* cohort

Most papers are short. Start with the chapter on Piazza and then read in the order presented. You should read with two objectives: (i) understand the basic research designs and (ii) appreciate how our knowledge of HIV and AIDS was incremental.

### Preparing for Class

* Epidemiology: Beyond the Basics, CH 1.4 (Piazza)
* **First case report/series**: Centers for Disease Control (CDC. (1981). Pneumocystis pneumonia--Los Angeles. [*MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report, 30(21)*](https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/june_5.htm).
* **First peer-reviewed case report/series**: Hymes, K., Greene, J., Marcus, A., William, D., Cheung, T., Prose, N., ... & Laubenstein, L. (1981). Kaposi's sarcoma in homosexual men—a report of eight cases. *The Lancet, 318(8247)*, 598-600. Published 4 months after the first MMWR.
* **First case-control study in the US**: Rogers, M. F., Morens, D. M., Stewart, J. A., Kaminski, R. M., Spira, T. J., Feorino, P. M., ... & Kaufman, L. (1983). National case-control study of Kaposi's sarcoma and Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in homosexual men: Part 2, laboratory results. *Annals of Internal Medicine, 99(2)*, 151-158.
* **First case report/series about AIDS among Black Africans "with no history of homosexuality or drug abuse"**: Clumeck, N., Mascart-Lemone, F., De Maubeuge, J., Brenez, D., & Marcelis, L. (1983). Acquired immune deficiency syndrome in black Africans. *The Lancet, 321(8325)*, 642.
* **Case-control study describing the detection and
iso­lation of HTLV-III**: Gallo, R. C., Salahuddin, S. Z., Popovic, M., Shearer, G. M., Kaplan, M., Haynes, B. F., ... & White, G. (1984). Frequent detection and isolation of cytopathic retroviruses (HTLV-III) from patients with AIDS and at risk for AIDS. *Science, 224(4648)*, 500-503.
* **First case-control study in Africa**: Piot, P., Taelman, H., Minlangu, K. B., Mbendi, N., Ndangi, K., Kalambayi, K., ... & Mazebo, P. (1984). Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in a heterosexual population in Zaire. *The Lancet, 324(8394)*, 65-69.
* **First peer-reviewed cohort study**: Jaffe, H. W., Darrow, W. W., Echenberg, D. F., O'malley, P. M., Getchell, J. P., Kalyanaraman, V. S., ... & Francis, D. P. (1985). The acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in a cohort of homosexual men. *Ann Intern Med, 103*, 210-214.
* **First AIDS Surveillance System in Africa**: Mann, J. M., Francis, H., Quinn, T., Asila, P. K., Bosenge, N., Nzilambi, N., ... & McCormick, J. (1986). Surveillance for AIDS in a central African city: Kinshasa, Zaire. *JAMA, 255(23)*, 3255-3259.
* **First country-specific estimates of HIV infection**: Burton, A. H., & Mertens, T. E. (1998). Provisional country estimates of prevalent adult human immunodeficiency virus infections as of end 1994: a description of the methods. *International Journal of Epidemiology, 27(1)*, 101-107.
* **First national HIV prevalence surveys**: Garcia-Calleja, J. M., Gouws, E., & Ghys, P. D. (2006). National population based HIV prevalence surveys in sub-Saharan Africa: results and implications for HIV and AIDS estimates. *Sexually Transmitted Infections, 82(suppl 3)*, iii64-iii70.
* [STROBE](http://www.equator-network.org/reporting-guidelines/strobe/)
* Pre-class readiness assessment (371/702)

### Slides/Materials

Posted [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0Bxn_jkXZ1lxuVklQakF4MjZGSDQ?usp=sharing) after class


* * *

[Back to schedule]({{ site.baseurl }}/schedule/)