---
layout: page
title: Regression discontinuity, interrupted time series
subtitle: Session 6.2
---

### About this Session

In this session you will learn about two underutilized tools in the quasi-experimental toolbox: regression discontinuity and interrupted time series.

### Preparing for Class

* Rashidian, A., Joudaki, H., Khodayari-Moez, E., Omranikhoo, H., Geraili, B., & Arab, M. (2013). The impact of rural health system reform on hospitalization rates in the Islamic Republic of Iran: an interrupted time series. *Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 91(12)*, 942-949.
* Smith, L. M., Kaufman, J. S., Strumpf, E. C., & Lévesque, L. E. (2015). Effect of human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination on clinical indicators of sexual behaviour among adolescent girls: The Ontario Grade 8 HPV Vaccine Cohort Study. *Canadian Medical Association Journal, 187(2)*, E74-E81.
* Pre-class readiness assessment (371/[702](https://sakai.duke.edu/samigo-app/servlet/Login?id=6c32d459-89fb-4545-b333-cd786e86aca11509854837513))

### Slides/Materials

Posted [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0Bxn_jkXZ1lxuVklQakF4MjZGSDQ?usp=sharing) after class

### In-Class Activity
<p></p>

#### A. Does vaccination for HPV increase risky sexual behavior?

Smith et al. (2015) used regression discontinuity to estimate the impact of Ontario's grade 8 HPV vaccination program on sexual behavior. Use what you've learned so far to identify the key details about the research design and methods.

#### B. Does improving access to healthcare decrease hospitalizations?

Rashidian et al. (2013) used an interrupted time series design to estimate the effect of a rural healthcare reform on hospitalization rates. How did the authors take advantage of routinely collected health system data to answer this question?

* * *

[Back to schedule]({{ site.baseurl }}/schedule/)