---
layout: page
title: Methods of Data Collection
subtitle: Session 4.3
---

### About this Session

In this session you will learn how to create a measurement plan that outlines how you will obtain data about study indicators.

### Session Learning Objectives
<iframe width="100%" height="200" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ZJjXrGU2WNa_77a20fbCC1tKwFU2heebiJiMdEtXHdA/pubhtml?gid=101408961&amp;single=true&amp;widget=true&amp;headers=false"></iframe>
[Download as PDF](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ZJjXrGU2WNa_77a20fbCC1tKwFU2heebiJiMdEtXHdA/pub?gid=101408961&single=true&output=pdf)

### In-Class Activities

*Get back together with your team members from Session 4.2. Open the response template you started and follow the instructions on this page.*

| **Pre-class prep** | Read Patil et al. (2014). The effect of India's Total Sanitation Campaign on Defecation Behaviors and Child Health in Rural Madhya Pradesh: A cluster randomized controlled trial. [*PLOS Medicine, 11(8), 1-17*](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0Bxn_jkXZ1lxub0xMNGJaVXNxZk0). Focus on the Introduction and Methods.|
| **Materials**       | Continue using the document you began editing in Session 3.3 |
| **Submission**     | Share with `designsandmethods@` if you have not done so already |

<p></p>

#### Part 1. Identify how Patil et al. (2014) measured (aka collected data on) key study variables

1. Visit the [study's entry in the World Bank Microdata Catalog](http://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/2033), review the data collection materials, and describe in detail how the authors collected endline data on the primary outcome: diarrhea among kids under 5. How do you think they constructed this indicator based on your review of the data collection materials?
2. How did the authors collect data to construct the indicator "HH participated or is aware of CLTS activities" reported in Table 3 of Patil et al.? Please be specific. (hint: the answer is in the related materials in the catalog, not the paper)

<p></p>

#### Part 2. Create a measurement plan for your logic model

Return to the logic model you developed in Session 4.2 for your new intervention (*not* Patil et al.) and create a measurement plan. List each indicator in a table and describe how you will collect data.

#### Part 3. Share your work and critically appraise another team's slide deck

1. When prompted, please share your work on the new intervention (not Patil et al.) with another team. They will share with you. Do not discuss anything with the team when sharing. Your slide deck should include:
	* Theory of change
	* Logic model
	* Table of outcome definitions
	* Table of data collection methods

2. Review the other team's work. Document your ideas for improvement. You might be ask to present your colleagues' work—and your critique—at the end of class.

* * *

[Back to schedule]({{ site.baseurl }}/schedule/)