---
layout: page
title: Experimental Designs: Applications
subtitle: Session 7.4
---

### About this Session

In this session you will examine the tradeoffs of a stepped wedge design and consider how systematic attrition and non-compliance bias results. 


### In-Class Activities

#### Part 1: Stepped wedge designs

Let's return to the study by Patil et al. (2014) on the effect of India's Total Sanitation program on diarrhea prevalence. According to the authors:

> The study was originally designed to have 80% power to detect a 4.5 percentage point reduction in diarrhea prevalence among children <5 years old assuming 15% prevalence in the control group (or a 30% relative reduction) with a two-sided alpha of 5%, and an intra-class correlation of 0.105. These assumptions led to a design with 40 clusters (villages) per arm and 25 households with children <24 months per cluster.

Do you get the same number of clusters required per arm given these parameters? If not, how many clusters do you think would be necessary?

Imagine that you want to replicate this study, but your government partners, who will be responsible for rolling out the program, tell you that they can't "turn on" the program all at once for so many clusters. Examine possible alternatives (still randomized) and consider the implications for the number of clusters, sample size, observations, study duration, and power. Record your findings in [this template](https://drive.google.com/open?id=190z1RIPajtcRbNGa_rB1BFDRLYpK5Q3qDB4AypDN6TY). If your primary concern is treatment fidelity, which design would you choose and why?

| D1 | cluster randomized trial, parallel |
| D2 | CRT, sequential, up to k=42 at a time |
| D3 | CRT, stepped wedge, complete, 3 steps |
| D4 | CRT, stepped wedge, complete, 4 steps |
| D5 | CRT, stepped wedge, complete, 5 steps |
| D6 | CRT, stepped wedge, incomplete ([2 pre-post](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1WRKIZd047GsSNhVZv6_7skMFLLH71EjMcDDhx8IckgU)), 5 steps |

[Patil et al. had a long follow-up period, but they wrote it would have been reasonable to measure diarrhea outcomes just a few months after the intervention was delivered. So for this exercise, let's assume that you can measure outcomes 3 months after the intervention.]

#### Part 2: Attrition and Partial Compliance

See the template for the tutorial.

* * *

[Back to schedule]({{ site.baseurl }}/schedule/)